schemas.xml and locate.rnc are part of Emacs.  They are used by nXML
mode for mapping schemas to documents.

The remaining files in this directory are schema for a variety of
specifications released by the DocBook project, the Organization for
the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) and the
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).  These schema are used by nXML mode.

COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE INFORMATION FOR SCHEMA FILES

The following files are part of the DocBook project:

  calstbl.rnc dbcalstbl.rnc dbhier.rnc dbnotn.rnc dbpool.rnc
  dbstart.rnc docbook.rnc

These files are Copyright (C) 1992-2002 HaL Computer Systems, Inc.,
O'Reilly & Associates, Inc., ArborText, Inc., Fujitsu Software
Corporation, Norman Walsh, Sun Microsystems, Inc., and the
Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards
(OASIS).  They are distributed under the terms of the following
license:

  Permission to use, copy, modify and distribute the DocBook DTD and
  its accompanying documentation for any purpose and without fee is
  hereby granted in perpetuity, provided that the above copyright
  notice and this paragraph appear in all copies.  The copyright
  holders make no representation about the suitability of the DTD for
  any purpose.  It is provided "as is" without expressed or implied
  warranty.



The following files are derived from technical recommendations
published by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C):

  1. The XHTML Modularization Version 1.1 standard, available online
     at http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml-modularization/

      xhtml-applet.rnc xhtml-attribs.rnc xhtml-base.rnc xhtml-bdo.rnc
      xhtml-bform.rnc xhtml-btable.rnc xhtml-csismap.rnc
      xhtml-datatypes.rnc xhtml-edit.rnc xhtml-events.rnc
      xhtml-form.rnc xhtml-frames.rnc xhtml-hypertext.rnc
      xhtml-iframe.rnc xhtml-image.rnc xhtml-inlstyle.rnc
      xhtml-legacy.rnc xhtml-link.rnc xhtml-lst.rnc xhtml-meta.rnc
      xhtml-nameident.rnc xhtml-object.rnc xhtml-param.rnc
      xhtml-pres.rnc xhtml.rnc xhtml-ruby.rnc xhtml-script.rnc
      xhtml-ssismap.rnc xhtml-struct.rnc xhtml-table.rnc
      xhtml-text.rnc xhtml-tgt.rnc xhtml-xstyle.rnc

  2. The XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 1.0 standard, available
     online at http://www.w3.org/TR/xslt

      xslt.rnc

  3. The W3C RDF/XML Syntax Specification (Revised), available online
     at http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-syntax-grammar

      rdfxml.rnc

These files are Copyright (C) 2001-2008 World Wide Web Consortium,
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology, European Research Consortium
for Informatics and Mathematics, Keio University).  All Rights
Reserved.  From section 5.10 of the W3C Intellectual Rights FAQ
( http://www.w3.org/Consortium/Legal/IPR-FAQ-20000620 ),
schemas and DTDs that are part of W3C specifications are licensed
under the W3C Software License:

  This work (and included software, documentation such as READMEs, or
  other related items) is being provided by the copyright holders
  under the following license. By obtaining, using and/or copying this
  work, you (the licensee) agree that you have read, understood, and
  will comply with the following terms and conditions.

  Permission to copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
  documentation, with or without modification, for any purpose and
  without fee or royalty is hereby granted, provided that you include
  the following on ALL copies of the software and documentation or
  portions thereof, including modifications:

   1. The full text of this NOTICE in a location viewable to users of
      the redistributed or derivative work.

   2. Any pre-existing intellectual property disclaimers, notices, or
      terms and conditions. If none exist, the W3C Software Short
      Notice should be included (hypertext is preferred, text is
      permitted) within the body of any redistributed or derivative
      code.

   3. Notice of any changes or modifications to the files, including
      the date changes were made. (We recommend you provide URIs to
      the location from which the code is derived.)

  THIS SOFTWARE AND DOCUMENTATION IS PROVIDED "AS IS," AND COPYRIGHT
  HOLDERS MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
  INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR
  FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE
  OR DOCUMENTATION WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY PATENTS,
  COPYRIGHTS, TRADEMARKS OR OTHER RIGHTS.

  COPYRIGHT HOLDERS WILL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
  SPECIAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THE
  SOFTWARE OR DOCUMENTATION.

  The name and trademarks of copyright holders may NOT be used in
  advertising or publicity pertaining to the software without
  specific, written prior permission. Title to copyright in this
  software and any associated documentation will at all times remain
  with copyright holders.



The file relaxng.rnc is derived from the RELAX NG Compact Syntax
Committee Specification, which is Copyright (C) 2002 The Organization
for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS).  This
specification (which is also essentially identical to ISO/IEC 19757-2)
may be viewed at

  http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/relax-ng/compact-20021121.html#formal-syntax

and is released under the following license:

  This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
  others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
  or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
  and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
  kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
  are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this
  document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
  the copyright notice or references to OASIS, except as needed for
  the purpose of developing OASIS specifications, in which case the
  procedures for copyrights defined in the OASIS Intellectual Property
  Rights document must be followed, or as required to translate it
  into languages other than English.

  The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
  revoked by OASIS or its successors or assigns.

  This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
  "AS IS" basis and OASIS DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
  IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
  THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
  WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
